General overview of "SOS" and principles

SOS, or "simple operating system", is a progressive implementation of the IP modules 
system on a standalone system. There are several logical stages of such a system, not all of 
which it makes sense to implement:

1. A stand alone stack of linked IP binaries.

2. A core system that supports one TPA.

3. A core system that supports multiple TPAs.

4. A virtual memory system.

The first, a stack based system, is the simplest. It just takes the normal application stack 
and adds the modules necessary to achieve runability direct to the hardware. For 
example, syslib could itself separate device calls out by type and call an ad-hoc collection 
of packages to implement them.

This would work, but would be inflexible. Each new device would have to be specifically 
built in to syslib. Instead, we implemented a driver registration system.

Standard Drivers

The standard driver system allows a series of drivers to be registered by organizing each 
drivers' name, type, and a series of service vectors as a record and storing it in a driver 
list. This is done by the driver registration package, which consists of devcal and devreg. 
Devcal is an assembly language module that gives the ability to get and call vectors to 
predefined device routine classes. Devreg maintains the device registration list, giving the
ability to get a device registration entry, place it active in the list, and search for drivers 
by name. The setting of fields in the device entry, and placement of device vectors into it, 
are performed by the device itself.

The drivers list forms the basic "root" namespace in IP/SOS implementation. Filesystems 
are "device rooted", in that the root of each filesystem is a device, and all devices are 
rooted in an abstract global root that is the device list. Thus:

/hd1

Is a device (the hard disk), and

/hd1/usr/file1.txt

is a full path specification. Since device rooting inherently creates a dependency on the 
particular device used, IP/SOS implements the concept of "logical devices" to allow files 
to be specified in a device independent way:

/sys/bin/cc

Here "sys" is a logical device that gives the fixed storage volume for which most program 
and data storage occurs.

Each driver exists in the application stack after the driver registration package, and 
registers itself into the device root list on startup. Typically, all devices will so be 
registered before syslib in the stack. In this way, when syslib starts, it will have access to 
all defined devices.

After each of the drivers, an essential step is the appearance of the logical device module. 
The logical device module performs the final step of connecting real physical devices to 
logical I/O devices. For example, the _input and _output devices have to be connected to 
real physical devices.

The ability to define logical devices flows naturally from the device registry process. A 
new device can be created that is just a copy of an existing device registration entry, or a 
device can be created that simply modifies some of the characteristics of the device, but 
uses the underlying device (a so called "layered" device), or any combination thereof. The 
logcal device module both assigns logical devices as copies of the existing physical
devices, and also creates layered devices.

For example, the _output device is simply a copy of an existing physical device, but the 
_input device both attaches to existing physical devices and uses layered processing. It 
must typically echo to an output device, and may in fact fully buffer its input lines and 
even provide line edit and history functions.

Advanced Drivers

The driver system can extend to advanced devices. The unification factor here is the 
ability to act as a stream device. For example, a terminal stream covers everything from 
elementry I/O to 3D graphical functions in IP/SOS methodogy. However, the basic idea 
of a driver is to include only essential functions and leaving it to application stacks to 
cover the remaining software fill work.

Of course, this sounds like a fundamental feature of IP, and that is true to a varying 
degree. IP starts as an essential device coverage, and moves upwards towards pure 
software functions. For example, graphics output starts at the hardware level, and moves 
toward a windowing capability that is software implemented.

Some of the difference can be illustrated by example. The trmlib standard can be 
implemented at base by these calls (over and above basic serial implementation):



metics(x, y);
position(x, y);
setattr(attset);
setcolor(color);
cursor(onoff);
auto(onoff);
scroll(x, y);

The interface is simplified considerably by the lack of any input, the implementation of 
many of the "convience" calls such as "up", "down", and the tabbing system, and the lack 
of need to unify such devices as the timer, joystick, etc.

There are many other kinds of devices that make no sense as serial devices at all. For 
example, the timers, joystick and mouse have no use as a serial paradygm. However, the 
use of the drivers list mechanisim allows them to be registered, controlled and 
multiplexed as other devices.

Interface to the Application

The application gets a view of the devices via its IP application support modules, and a 
limited view of devices in general. For example, opening different devices gives a view of 
devices as intermediated by syslib.

A single TPA Based System

An IP/SOS with a single TPA is achieved by creating a modular connection method for 
the TPA application to the core software. This can be done by hardware or software 
means, for example a software interrupt or a single vector via an understood location.

A TPA based system differs from a simple stack implementation in that the application 
libraries are transferred to the TPA, and the basic implementations are left as OS vectors. 
Since the direct device vectors must at least be covered by a buffering layer to remove the 
direct interface via device registration objects, what occurs is more of a split down the 
middle of each IP module into what makes sense for the portability of the application, 
and what makes sense to implement in general. In practice this is a very light layer. For
example, it does not make sense to implement aliasing functions or a function to 
determine what line ending to output in the system functions, but the graphical package is 
essentially turned into a vectored call equivalent.

In a single TPA based system, Each application is linked and loaded for a single TPA 
address. This means also that multiple applications can only be implemented by swapping. 
This tends to inherently be an ineffective management strategy on modern systems that 
are not memory limited.



A Multiple TPA System

A MULTPLE TPA system requires the ability to relocate each application to a separate 
partition, and may or may not include the ability to provide hardware protection between 
applications. Each applications load format must include a relocation dictionary sufficient 
to indicate and change all of the address dependent data in the binary.

A Virtual Memory System

The virtual memory system is a straightforward improvement on a single TPA based 
system in that it also needs vectorized system I/O, and has similar division of labor issues.

In the majority of cases, the single TPA step will be skipped over for a full VMA based 
system. Most modern processors have VMA hardware, and VMA is the winning choice 
for the method to manage multiple programs, processes and threads.

IP/SOS can implement a simple VMA based system as an alternative to VO/SO based 
systems.

