						  CREATING ENCODER BACKENDS

PURPOSE

This document is for people who will create or modify encoder back ends.

OVERVIEW

The encoder module is the most important module in the IP language system
because it must be modified for each processor supported. This fact does not
necessarily mean that every last element of processor-general code must be
wrung out and placed elsewhere. Copying and carry forward of routines with
slight modification does as much to lessen the work required to generate a
new back-end. Indeed, having a large body of different processors back-ends
will form a virtual library that smooths each successive implementation.
Nevertheless, the back end work should be as clean and separated as possible.

LAYOUT OF BACKENDS

The compiler chain consists of two programs or passes, the parser, and the
optimizer-encoder. But the processor dependent isolation does not end at the 
encoder. Instead, there is a module WITHIN the encoder that contains processor
specific information. This module can be linked, not compiled, to create a full
back-end.

To understand how the encoder works, you must have a working knowledge of the
intermediate format on which it is based. The encoders basic job is to imput
the intermediate, create a graph structure from that, then pass that
information to the machine module for code generation.

In the intermediate, the type information, symbols and code are unified
artificially. The encoder splits these into separate internal data structures.
The code becomes an arbitrarily linked graph, completely losing its stack
oriented structure. This is then given to the machine module.

The type information exists as an arbitrary graph even in the intermediate,
and that is stored in an internal, fully emmeshed format.

Finally, the symbols are formed into a simple table, and output with the
output of the symbols file.
Each of these lists are separated by the block they belong to.

Although the intermediate graph is sometimes referred to here as a "tree",
it actually consists of an acyclic graph with expression trees. The main code
is a linear series of chained intermediates with loops and other subblocks
as side chains. Each operator can have up to four expression trees as
operands. The sidechain for a loop is represented as a single, linear
chain with its loop nature implied in the operator, not the graph. Hence,
it is acyclic, and can be toured by a simple forward algorithim with left to
right branch exploration.

The front end of the encoder contains its own optimizer. The optimizer 
considers each block graph and applies several optimizations on it that
are transparent to the machine module. During this process, several new
intermediates that did not exist in the original intermediate file are
created, and at the same time others are removed. For this reason, the
entire internal form of the intermediate is documented, and that must be
used as a reference instead of the intermediate format which it came from.

The code tree for each block is passed to the machine module. The type tree is
modified and used for a reference by the machine module. Lastly, the symbols
module is typically ignored by the machine module.

The encoder works in terms of blocks. Each block is completely input, the code
graph created, and that passed to the machine module for encoding, then the
code entries are recycled.

In the encoder, it is a policy not to keep the code graph for each block, but
the types and symbols are kept. This is for space reasons. The optimizer does
keep small blocks resident for inlining purposes.

Each block is processed in the following phases:

1. The block is input.

2. A improvement pass is made over the code, including allocation of temps.

3. The sizes of block variables and other structures is done.

4. The locals and parameters are allocated.

5. Registers are allocated for each node of the code graph, and stack
maintenence instructions are generated.

6. The code is generated for the block.

Of these steps, the last four are all done by the machine module.

FORMAT OF CODE GRAPHS

The code graphs are designed to be as close to the original intermediate codes
as possible. Each intermediate entry in the tree appears as:

1. Next pointer. This is used to form a list of all the intermediate entries
for a block. This list order implies nothing about execution order.

2. Flow pointers. The flow pointers indicate the next node in execution order.
There is both a "normal" flow pointer and a "branch" flow pointer, that is used
to represent branches in the code.

3. Operand pointers. There can be up to 4 operands of an intermediate node.
These are labeled left, right, xtra and xtra2. The convention is that the
pointers are used in order of appearance in the original program. Hence, "left"
and "right" refer to the left and right operands in the original source.

4. Registers. There are two register codes in each entry, rega and regb. This
does not refer as much to a machine dependancy as that a "fat" or tagged
pointer typically requires two registers. However, it turns out that other
places in the code also may require two registers per node.

5. Stack control. The stack masks are sets of the registers that tell which
registers must be saved on the stack at each node level, and also keep track
of what registers are needed and which are preferred during the register
allocation phase.

GRAPH TRAVERSAL

Graph traversal is done is done in two levels. The block graph is toured
with linear list processing with left to right chain exploration. Each operator
has a "flow" linkage that gives the linear list for the complete block, and
from 1 to 2 other sidechain linkages referred to as flow2 and flow3
("flow" being flow 1). Each side chain is linear with zero termination, and
thus the graph is acyclic, or without loops. The operator involved gives the
intermediate the idea of loops or alternatives. For example, the body of
a "for" loop is a side chain, and both the "true" and "false" blocks of an
"if" are sidechains.

The second level of the intermediate are the expression trees. These are
walked as a tree from left to right, with N levels of subbranching. Each
operator, whether in the main graph or in an expression tree, can have from
one to four operand tree roots known as left, right, xtra and xtra2. The
"left" and "right" are the ordering from the original source, for instance
the assignment operator for a := b has a equals left and b equals right.
However, the meaning of ordering can be changed by the optimizer.


