********************************************************************************

                         ENCODER THEORY OF OPERATION

********************************************************************************

Purpose
-------

The enoder processes the IP Pascal intermediate form direct from the parser 
downto final code. The prerequiste for this document is the "Pascal intermediate
format", Appendix B of the "IP Pascal language manual".

Standard interchange intermediate code
--------------------------------------

The intermediate code is structured as an interpreted code using a stack machine
to process it. In fact, it is used in very nearly that form in the simulator,
which gives it a simple translation to internal form, then executes it.

The pure "stack machine" executable model is augumented or "decorated" by a
series of additional information that turns it into a complete intermediate 
form, complete with all typing information and symbols. All type information
is sent in intermediate codes, and various points in the intermediate reference
these types. For example, a limint or "load immediate integer" contains the
value of the constant integer to load, but a lodadr or "load address" 
instruction contains a pointer to the type entry of the variable that the 
address of is to be loaded.

In addition, various operators may have decorations that are designed to
eliminate the need to store typing information gathered at the leaves for
operations at branches higher up. For example, equstr or "find string equal"
expects the two string addresses on the stack to compare, but takes a parameter
indicating the base type of the strings that are being compared, from which it
finds the length of the strings to compare. These are called "helper types",
and there may be more than one per stack operator. For example, pack and unpack
contain the type link for both the packed and unpacked array.

History
-------

The first client of the IP Pascal intermediate code was the simulator. It
performs a simple translation of the intermediate code to internal form and
executes it.

The next client was the check encoder, which translated the intermediate to a
series of "expansions" that took all operands off the stack and replaced the
result back on the stack. It was the check encoder that created the need for
most of the helper type references, since the check encoder didn't store
the leaf typing information.

The check encoder is dated and is no longer used. The encoder does not really
need helper type information, just leaf typing information, so many of the
helper references are stored within the encoder, but otherwise ignored.
It is also possible now, because the check encoder is no longer used, that
there is not sufficient helper type information to make a "new version" of
a check encoder able to work, although the effort was made to keep adding
helper types to new intermediates.

The last client was the encoder itself, which replaced the check encoder. It
started a new routine calling convention, and because of that, a translator
or "thunk" assembly level module was created to allow full encoder created
code to call old library code created by the check encoder. When the new
encoder was able to compile all libraries, and all of the lower level assembly
support routines were converted to the new convention, the thunk layer was
discarded and the entire system unified.

Encoder workings
----------------

The encoder is split into two halves. The top level is the machine independent
level (encoder.pas) and the bottom level is the machine dependent level
machine.pas). These modules are compile time target independent, but not link
time. This is because several of the equates must be machine dependent.	For
example, the register definitions are machine dependent, and do not appear
in the encoder side, but are parts of records used everywhere. This may
be improved in subsequent versions.

Encode module functions
-----------------------

Internal format of the intermediate
-----------------------------------

The intermediate unifies types, operations, symbols, and source file and line
number debugging information. Each of these is separated out in the encoder
into separate data structures.

The stack operations in the intermediate become the internal intermediate code
in the encoder. The types are reconstructed into a linked, block based type
structure system very similar to the one that was originally created in the 
parser. The symbols are stored in a list that is also per block. The source file
and line number debugging information is presently unused and is discarded.

The encoder translates the stack intermediate operations into a series of
intermediate code entries that are sufficiently different that an internal
naming system for them is used, unlike the simulator and the check encoder which
use the same names as the intermediate, even if the intermediate itself is in 
different form.

Each block of the intermediate is translated to a separate intermediate tree.
Thus, each module, procedure and function has a startup block, and modules may
have an exit block as well. The intermediate is referred to as the "graph" form,
and is "acyclic", or free of loops as part of its structure. As a result, a 
complete traverse of the internal block is possible without complex coding.

The acyclic nature of the graph is done as follows. The block code is arranged
as a list of "intermediate" entries, which logically flow from the block top
to the bottom. Each structured statement represents its controlled section as
sidebranches to the list. For example, the "if" tolken has a list for true
condition and an optional list for false (else). The "if" tolken itself,
however, is simply a single tolken in the main block list. The branch lists
for the if terminate. So the graph for the block is traversed by exploring
the token list with branch visitiation that recurses on each sublist to its end.
The "goto" tolken is a special case, and directly references its target, but
that reference is not considered part of the graph. This prevents cycles, but
must be handled as a special case of register set merging.

Format of intermediate code elements
------------------------------------

The basic intermediate entry is detailed by "int", and it's pointer by "intptr".
These entries have a next pointer to form basic lists, but this primary used to
recycle the entries. The intermediate tree has it's own format, which is an
acyclic graph with expression trees attached to what are called "terminal 
points" such as store operations or if statements (which use the expressions).

The first level of intermediate, the graph form, follows the "flow" linkages in
the intermediate. In general, the "flow" link indicates the normal next operator
in the intermediate that would be executed. Flow2 and flow three indicate 
changes in the normal flow of the code. For example, an if statement has it's
"false" path set in flow, and the "true" path set to flow2. So the "normal"
flow is the if statement that does not execute, and "flow2" is the if statement
if it does execute:

Flow
|
|
\/
if true flow2 ----> int1 ----> int2 ----> ... ----> <nil>
|
|
\/
Flow

If the if statement has an else clause, that flow is assigned to the flow3
linkage as:

Flow
|
|
\/
if true flow2 ----> int1 ----> int2 ----> ... ---> <nil>
   false flow3 ----> int1 ----> int2 ----> ... ---> <nil>
|
|
\/
Flow

Thus, both the true and the false (else) branches are represented by
side chains in the intermediate.

Even a loop represents the controlled loop section as a side chain:

Flow
|
|
\/
while con do flow2 ----> int1 ----> int2 ----> ... ---> <nil>
|
|
\/
Flow

This is the key to understanding the intermediate as a tree. Each contained
statement list is a side chain in the intermediate, and this can go to any
level. The side chain of an if can contain another if, or any complexity of
structures, but all of the code paths terminate in a nil. There are no loops in
the intermediate, hence it is acyclic. Only gotos form a loop, and they are
considered symbolic links in the intermediate, and not hard linkages.

Expression trees branch off any operator containing a terminal, or a usage of
the value of the expression. A store operator is a terminal, so is an if, a
while and similar operators. They "use" the result of the expression, and thus
are terminal.

Expression trees are generally structured as a series of left/right branches,
but they can actually have up to four branches on one int node. These are the
left, right, xtra and xtra2 branches. Here is an example:

    istiint -> B
      |
      |
      \/
    iaddint
      |
      |
  Left  Right
   |      |
  |        |
ilimint    ildiint
|            |
\/           \/
A            1

For b := a+1

Because the entire intermediate for a block is a tree, it can be traversed by
following the flow linkages flow, flow2, flow3, and the expression linkages 
left, right, xtra, and xtra2, recursing for each sublist, and stopping at each
nil terminal.

As mentioned, each intermediate can have one or more helper types. These type
linkages are stored in base, base2, and base3. Some of the helper types, as
mentioned, are no longer useful in the encoder, but many give essential
information such as a constant to be loaded, or the address of a variable, etc.

The helper type was frequently useful for checking the exact type of any 
expression branch, since many properties of a type can be determined from any
type entry, such as the address, size, scalar vs. structured, etc. Because
of this there exists another linkage called "rbase" or "result base", which is
always available. This linkage is placed by a routine, plcrestyp, that traverses
the intermediate block that was just created and places all of the result types
in any intermediate that is expected to return a value.

The base and rbase links are accessed frequently by code that determines 
properties of expression result trees in the code, and which is used for which
can be confusing in the code. But they do not duplicate each other. The base
links are not always there, whereas the rbase link exists on any result bearing
expression operator. Rbase never carries things like addresses or constants,
but base does.

Reading in the intermediate and convertion to graph form
--------------------------------------------------------

The entire intermediate is processed by prcint, which reads each intermediate
operator and processes the code in terms of blocks. Prcint starts by reading
the "signature" from the intermediate file, which is a 32 bit or 4 character
signature which is fairly arbitrary.

For each intermediate, it calls getcod to read the intermediate code, then
calls rdint to finish processing and reading the rest of the intermediate.
Getcod reads 16 bit intermediate codes. At one time, the intermediates fit
into 8 bits, but that number was exceeded long ago.

rdint takes the first intermediate code read, along with the root pointer of the
list to create, and the last item in the list. Logically, rdint is simply 
reading the remainder of the intermediate entry, then adding that to the linear
flow of the list represented by "flow" pointers. However, rdint recursively 
calls itself to create side chains, so it effectively reads in the entire
intermediate.

Logically, prcint reads in the contents of the system block, which contains no
code, only type definitions. As markers for each code block appear, such as 
bgnpgm for the program, module, procedure or function startup block, and bgnext
for the program or module finalizer block, a sublist is created and planted in
the block's entry or exit intermediate list. When the endlvl tolken is seen, it
signifies that the entire intermediate for the block has been read, both startup
and exit sections. This then causes code to be generated for that entire block,
even as the intermediate read process takes place. This means that all of the
intermediates and even the types for a block can be discarded after the block is
generated to save space.

On endlvl, several optimization and arrangement passes can be made over the 
code, both to the entry and exit sections. Each of these passes are traversals
over the graph that represents the code. The optimizations are:

lodsto - load and store indirect simplification to direct load and store

cstopr - Constant folding

remdead - Dead code elimination

bol2jmp - Boolean operator to jump translation

Then a number of general processing operations are done:

plcup - Places up tree references in expression trees. This is used during 
        register allocation.

plcrestyp - Place all of the rbase equivalences as discussed previously.

resblk - Resolve forward pointer references (this is actually done several times
         during intermediate read).

setgbl - Sets which procedures and functions are global in a module. This is
         done several times.

sizblk - Set sizes of types in the block. Done several times.

setrecoff - Sets the offset addresses in records. Done several times.

xltchrset - Translates character sets to internal form. Done several times.

Finally, genblk is called to pass the block to the machine encoder section to
be output as machine code.

The reason why some of the housekeeping processes are done several times is that
some of the types are scattered around the intermediate code. For example, 
constant entries can occur before the code block starts, but can also be 
scattered within the code itself. Some of the types are used during the 
processing of code, so all of the types must be processed both before the code
for the block is generated, as well as after the entire block is read in.

Overview of front end operation
-------------------------------

The main block in encode starts by clearing all of the globals, then calls the
inimac() procedure to let the machine specific module initalize, including 
signing on for the encoder.

The external module parlib is then used to process the command line. This is
used with the command file, and the procedure paropt is used to process the
options. The command line is processed for the intermediate file to operate on,
in the format:

file[=file]

Only a single intermediate file is allowed, but the user can optionally specify
a source and destination, if code is to be generated, or just the file, if the
encode is simply to be done for error checking.

The input files are then opened, and the output file.obj and file.sym files are
opened if there is to be output.

The zero block is then created. The zero or system block. This block not only
takes in the system definitions, but is used to place several housekeeping 
entries. Examples are the _pstr, _pend, _vstr and _vend symbols required for the
symbols file, and all of the support library definitions.

There are three support libraries that are used, and one call that is made 
directly to the wrapper module. This last is done because the call is system
oriented, and must be programmed in assembly language.

The libraries are:

paslib - Used for general Pascal oriented processing
syslib - Used for low level system support
maclib - Used for machine specific routines

After the encoder finishes these operations, sysblk is called to allow the
machine module to define system level entries.

The code generation process then begins. Encode emits a jump with a forwarded
address to jump from the start of the generated module to the entry block, over
any of the included procedures or functions.

Then, the entire intermediate is processed, and the symbols output phase begins.
As for the assembler/linker, the IP format contains the object code and the 
symbols deck in two different files. This means the entire object code can be 
output before the symbol file starts.

The final step in the object file generation is to output the global constants
to the .obj file. Then setaddr is called to locate all of the global variable
addresses.

The symbols file is then completely output from the resolved type and symbol
tables in encode, if output mode is on. This code is very similar to the
same code in the linker and assembler.

Finally, the output files are closed and if the option is set, statistics about
the run are output.

Machine module functions
------------------------

General flow
------------

This is the general idea of the encoder. The phases are similar to the
old check encoder:

1. Read in block.

2. Resolve sizes, locals allocations, parameter lists and locals.

3. Generate variables.

4. Generate block code.

5. Generate constants area.

6. Generate symbols.

MACHINE SPECIFIC/INDEPENDENT CODE DIVISION

In order to keep the machine dependent section as small as possible, we want
to keep as much code as possible in the machine independent section of the
encoder. However, there are two basic ways to handle the minimization of
machine specific work. The first is to try to handle machine specific cases
by parameterisation such as tables, with the table information being in the
machine specific module and the handler in the independent section. The second
way is to simply have a routine that appears fairly similar between
implementations but is customized on each machine.

Because the latter is simpler to implement for the first version, we use this
method. As the encoder develops, these changing routines can be moved to use
parameterization as possible.

The routines that define the back end (machine dependent side) are:

Contains all the machine specific information and rotines for Intel series
I80386, I80486 and I80586 CPUs. This module encodes 32 bit mode           
instructions only.                                                        
                                                                          
Besides the list of main section routines this module uses, the interface 
to this module consist of the following calls:                            
                                                                          
inimac - This performs all this modules initalization. This includes      
the sign on and variable initalization.

sysblk - Called after the first block is created
                                                                          
paropt - Parses and checks for various options. This gives our module a   
chance to set machine specific options.                                   
                                                                          
sizblk - Sets the variable and other object sizes for the current block.  
                                                                          
allloc - Allocates the locals in the current block. This includes the     
parameters.                                                               
                                                                          
setrecoff - Sets the record offsets in the current block. The base offset 
address of each record element is set.

genblk - Generates the code for the current block. The block internal     
graph is fully traversed.                                                 

prtreg - Prints a machine specific register.

prtflg - Prints a machine flag.

BLOCK ENCODING

The encode of the block is done via three passes:

1. Register allocation.

2. Block code generation.

The first two are covered by the genblk step. Genblk is called with the 
finished block ontop of the block stack. It generates code for both the entry
and the exit section.
The purpose of separating this
step is that it is possible to allocate registers in a block that will be
stored and not immediately encoded. This could be used, for instance, to plan
the calls to subprocedures.

The idea of encoding is that by the time actual coding work is done, each
intermediate type will have a logical handler, and the intermediate	entry
will have complete set of register allocations stating what input registers
are used and what register the output is to be placed in, and even extra
"helper" register entries containing temp registers needed. This level
of isolation allows both the individual encoding handlers to be highly
independent, and places all of the planning before the encoding starts.

REGISTER ALLOCATION

The first register allocation algorithim in the encoder is tree based. That is,
it walks the tree in left to right order to perform allocations. It is two pass,
in that the register allocation is done first, then the code generation pass is
done separately using the registers allocated in the first pass. This is in
contrast with the old 1982 algorithim that performs register allocation while
the code is being generated.

Register allocation assigns specific register to each operators result
and operands. Each operand is considered a package, that is, all of the
input and output registers are presented in the operator entry for the
final encode routine to use. The encode routine may still access the
leaves and even the root of the operand (full tree explore), but normally
it does not need to. This capability mainly applies to the case where
constant loads or addressing can be incorporated as part of the instruction.

Each operand has one result register and up to four input registers. The four
input registers correspond to the four operator branches of each operator.
The registers are further divided into initial and final registers. On the
input side, the inital registers are what each suboperand gave us, and
the final registers are the registers the operand needs to have those
results in. In most cases these registers are the same, but an operand may
deliver a result in a register that is not what is requested. In this case,
there is an implied move from the inital to the final register before
the operand is encoded.

REGISTER ENTRIES

Each intermediate has a series of registers that can be assigned to it:

lreg      Contains the left operand register
lregx

rreg      Contains the right operand register
rregx

xreg      Contains the extra operand register
xregx

x2reg     Contains the second extra operand register
x3regx

rsreg     Contains the result register
rsregx

freg      Contains the "final" register
fregx

t1reg     Contain temp registers
t2reg
t3reg

Each intermediate entry has 0 to 4 parameters, which was dictated by the
maximum number of parameters in an intermediate. Each operand of the 
intermediate has its own branch in the intermediate tree, and each one has an
associated operand register above. It is also possible for each operand to 
occupy two registers, the normal and an "extended" register marked with a an "x"
postfix.

The register that an operand occupies is copied to its register entry during
allocation. The result register, which can also be one to two registers, is 
assigned to be the output register from the operation to be carried out.

The "final" register is the register that actually carries the result back to
its parent operator in the intermediate tree. In most cases, it is the same as
the result register. However, if there are difficulties allocating that register
in the "context" of the calling operator, the two registers can be different.
When the intermediate is run through the coding phase, register copy operations
are generated as needed to move the register from the result to the final (or
"transfer") register.

The temp registers are simply used to signal to the coding pass where to place
temp registers that are needed.

All of these registers can have the rgnull value, meaning that there is no 
register needed or allocated there.

It is also possible to have a special register value rgflg. This indicates that
the value lies not in a register, but in a flag. To determine which flag, you
must look at a separate flag value:

lflg      Contains the left operand flag value.

rflg      Contains the right operand flag value.

xflg      Contains the extra operand flag value.

x2flg     Contains the second extra operand flag value.

The flag values are only relivant if the assocated register has the rgflg value.
The reason that flags are not directly represented as registers comes from the
way we treat them. Flags are not considered individual values, but as a "state"
of the flags. For instance, less than or equal is commonly represented by the
carry and the zero flags both being set. This model assumes that only one 
operand can or will be carried in the flags, so they are mutually exclusive. In
addition, values are typically carried in flags for a short time. The flag
system is really a simple way of letting the operator signal the true state
of a boolean return value, and let the parent operator decide what to do with
the information.

The register for a given operand in the intermediate is usually copied from the
final or transfer register of the subordinate entry (in fact, there are 
occasionally places in the code where the final register of the operand is
used directly). However, there are cases where the operand register does not
exactly match its transfer register. If the operand needs to be expanded, or
changed from a single to a double register, then the operand register will
be a double register, whereas the transfer register won't. In any case, it is
bad form to examine the operand intermediate entry directly. Rather the self
contained information in the intermediate entry itself should be used.

The converse situation is also possible. If the transfer register is double,
but what is needed is only a single, the double will be allocated in the
calling intermediate, whether it can use it or not. All results must go 
somewhere, even if they are then ignored.

REGISTER TRACKING

Besides the entries used to track individual registers, each intermediate also
keeps sets of all registers. These are used to track which registers are in use
at any given time.

push      Gives the set of registers that need to be pushed and poped.

alc       Gives the registers allocated at this node.

The alc set is used to perform basic register allocation, and tells the 
allocator exactly which registers are in use at any particular node. The push
set has each register set if the register is to be saved during the operation.
For each register set in the push mask, the register is saved before the 
intermediate operator is coded, and restored after. The push/pop scheme is used
to resolve register overflow issues.

The use of the alc and push sets to control allocation must be understood in
of the tree structure:

              + (add) 
              | Alc:  eax, ebx, ecx
              | Push: eax
              +
(load) L-------------R (load)
Alc:  eax            Alc: ebx
Push:                Push

Each intermediate has its own register allocation. It must apportion the operand
registers and temp registers from its own set of free registers. If a specific
register is not available, it must be pushed to make it available. Each operator
"knows what it is doing", and creates an allocation, or arrangement, of 
registers that makes sense, and does not overlap. When the intermediate entry
starts allocation, it inherits a copy of the current allocation from its parent.
If it needs a register that is in use by the parent, then it will put it in the
push mask. This means that it is saved and restored to and from the parent, and
is then effectively out of the register allocation. However, the allocation
within the intermediate itself must be consistent. If a register is requested,
but already allocated in this same allocation, then it is a double allocation
and a fault.

REGISTER ALLOCATION

Register allocation occurs by traversing the entire intermediate tree for a
procedure or function, and filling out the register fields in each intermediate.

While doing that, a set of register management calls are made to perform the
register allocation.

The routine:

procedure regblk(ip: intptr; var tr: regset);

Takes a full block tree, allocates all of its registers, and leaves the 
registers in the register fields of each operator entry. It takes a set of 
registers, which on return will be the total set of registers that were used
during the routine. This information is used to determine if the registers 
should be saved when a routine is entered.

regblk tours the graph by recursively calling itself, and performs allocation
on each terminal operator entry. These are entries such as tistiint, that hold
expression trees to be processed. Each expression tree is processed by:

procedure regexp(rr, rrx: regt; ip: intptr; var tr: regset);

Which assigns registers for the tree. Regexp recursively calls itself to
process each leaf in the tree. regexp takes as a parameter the two registers
that the operator being processed needs. These can be rgnull if there is no
specific register requirement. regexp also takes the set of allocated registers.

Regexp can, in cases, specify a register even if the final result may or may not
use it. For example, the rrx parameter can contain a register even if we don't
know if the operand to be processed has an extended register. The appearance of
a register in either rr or rrx means that if the result exists, then it will be
placed in that register.

The important thing to understand about regexp is that if a rr or rrx register
is specified, then the result will allways be placed there. It is not a
preference, it is a demand.

To perform the actual register allocations, a few routines do the bulk of the
work:

procedure getreg(var r: regt; ip: intptr; var tr: regset);
procedure getregbs(var r: regt; ip: intptr; var tr: regset);
procedure plcreg(r: regt; ip: intptr; var tr: regset);
procedure prfreg(var r: regt; pr: regt; ip: intptr; var tr: regset);

Each of the allocation routines takes a reference to the total allocation.
This is just an 'or' of all the registers that were used, so that genblk can
determine which registers to protect for the caller of a routine.

Each of the routines will be discussed in turn.

getreg

Takes the intermediate tree entry to allocate a register for, along
with a reference to the total allocation. It will find either a completely
free register, or not finding that, it will flag one of the registers in the
push mask, then use that. The register allocated is returned in the given
register variable.

getregbs

Performs the same task, but only allocates registers from the set that
are byte or word storable, that is, eax, ebx, ecx, or edx. It will not allocate
esi and esi. This routine is required for operands that must be stored to byte
or word values. The register allocated is returned in the given register
variable.

plcreg

allocates a specific register, which is passed. If the register is not
free, it is pushed.

prfreg 

is halfway between getreg and plcreg. It takes a "preference" register,
but if the register is not free, it will allocate another one. The reason for
this routine is that some register combinations save code, but not enough to
justify an extra push/pop to do it. An example of this is "add eax,n". The
target eax has a special more compact code format, but there is also a general
purpose "add r,n" that takes any register. The register allocated is returned in
the given register variable.

PERFORMING ALLOCATION

The register allocation is as simple as possible for a tree. Given only the alc
and push sets, the allocator can control the allocated registers with overflow
capability. The way to think of the allocator is to think of of each 
intermediate node as a box:

+--------------+
|    addint    |
|              |
|    alc       |
|    push      |
+--------------+

When the intermediate allocation starts, the parent allocation is copied into
the box, and the push set is cleared. The intermediate has complete control of
all the registers. If it needs a register that the parent flagged in use, then
it only needs to flag that as pushed, then it has the register to itself. When
processing is finished, it registers a result register, and at the same time
that the parent context is restored by poping any registers, the result register
is placed into the final or transfer register. The parent treats the box as a
function that places the result in the register it wants, and does not distroy
any other register.

MIXING FIXED AND VARIABLE REGISTER ALLOCATIONS

There is a non-obvious methodology for allocating a series of mixed fixed 
register allocations, or allocations to specific registers, and variable 
allocations that can go to any register. If a variable allocation is done, say
with a regexp() call without preference, and it allocates a specific register,
then that register is specified as fixed, then a "register already in use" error
may result.

The obvious solution would seem to be to process all individual fixed 
allocations first, such as plcreg(), then other calculations. But fixing a 
register takes it out of service, and doing that at the start may not be wise if
it might then be needed for suboperator calculations. So we need to think
carefully about allocations.

regexp() can be used either as a variable or fixed register complex calculator.
By contrast, getreg, plcreg, prfreg and the like are non-complex. Since a 
complex calculation can use any number of registers at any level, we need to
place operands in the following order:

1. Complex allocations with fixed registers.

2. Simple fixed allocations.

3. Complex allocations with variable registers.

4. Simple variable allocations.

REGISTER CONTEXT

The register context system is really separate from the register allocation. The
intermediate operators that care about context use it, mainly the loads and 
stores. Other operators simply use it to clear context entries out when they
are distroyed, corresponding to changes made to the containing register.

The context system creates context entries when simple values are loaded, and
flags them usable when a store takes place. Simple values are values
corresponding to a variable.

Context entries are kept in table indexed by register, and each entry contains
a type and an age in steps. The "steps" are simply a number that is incremented
each time the context is modified, namly the entry and exit of a context entry.

The main context management routines are:

function fndcxt(t: typptr): regt;
procedure setcxt(r: regt; t: typptr);
procedure remcxt(r: regt);
procedure cpycxt(dr, sr: regt);
procedure cpycxtp(dr1, dr2, sr1, sr2: regt);
procedure mrgcxt(view rc: regcxt);
procedure clrcxt;
procedure rescxt(var rc: regcxt);
procedure matcxt(t: typptr);

fndcxt

This routine finds if a register has the given context by type. If found, it 
returns that, else it returns rgnull.

setcxt

This routine sets up a context entry for the indicated register. The context
entry gets the type indicated, and has its age reset.

remcxt

This routine removes the context from the indicated register.

cpycxt

Copies a context from one register to another. This is used to update after a
copy from one register to another.

cpycxtp

This is the same as cpycxt, except performs copy on a register pair.

mrgcxt

Merges a saved context with the current context. Used to establish the net
context after a concentration point for two code flows.

clrcxt

Clears out all current context.

rescxt

Clears a stored context.

matcxt

Matches a context by type, and if found, clears it. This routine is used to
remove a context after it is updated, say by storing to the underlying variable.

The context system is simple in operation. A load of a simple variable checks
for a previous matching context entry, and if found, that is used instead of 
going through the actual load. If not found, then the newly loaded value is 
placed into the context system.

Contexts are saved at distribution points, or points where the code takes a 
branch, such as an 'if'. At a concentration point, such as where an 'if' comes
back together, the contexts are merged by comparing each register context 
between the saved and current context, and clearing out any context that is
different between the two. This can be extended to any number of merging entries
by simply merging all of the flows one at a time. This is how the case statement
works.

The entire context must be cleared at certain times. For example, we clear 
context both before and after while and for loops, and before a repeat loop,
although further research may discover a way to mitigate this.

In addition, we clear context after each call of an external or even built in
routine because the variables in the context might have changed. This is an
unfortunate side effect, and further research can be done to find ways to
more intellegently determine if the cached registers are really affected. For
example, a call to a global routine is never going to change locals.
