         11111111112222222222333333333344444444445555555555666666666677777777778
12345678901234567890123456789012345678901234567890123456789012345678901234567890

                            REGISTER ALLOCATION

OVERVIEW

The first register allocation algorithim in the encoder is tree based. That is,
it walks the tree in left to right order to perform allocations. It is two pass,
in that the register allocation is done first, then the code generation pass is
done separately using the registers allocated in the first pass. This is in
contrast with the old 1982 algorithim that performs register allocation while
the code is being generated.

Register allocation assigns specific register to each operators result
and operands. Each operand is considered a package, that is, all of the
input and output registers are presented in the operator entry for the
final encode routine to use. The encode routine may still access the
leaves and even the root of the operand (full tree explore), but normally
it does not need to. This capability mainly applies to the case where
constant loads or addressing can be incorporated as part of the instruction.

Each operand has one result register and up to four input registers. The four
input registers correspond to the four operator branches of each operator.
The registers are further divided into initial and final registers. On the
input side, the inital registers are what each suboperand gave us, and
the final registers are the registers the operand needs to have those
results in. In most cases these registers are the same, but an operand may
deliver a result in a register that is not what is requested. In this case,
there is an implied move from the inital to the final register before
the operand is encoded.

REGISTER ENTRIES

Each intermediate has a series of registers that can be assigned to it:

lreg      Contains the left operand register
lregx

rreg      Contains the right operand register
rregx

xreg      Contains the extra operand register
xregx

x2reg     Contains the second extra operand register
x3regx

rsreg     Contains the result register
rsregx

freg      Contains the "final" register
fregx

t1reg     Contain temp registers
t2reg
t3reg

Each intermediate entry has 0 to 4 parameters, which was dictated by the
maximum number of parameters in an intermediate. Each operand of the 
intermediate has its own branch in the intermediate tree, and each one has an
associated operand register above. It is also possible for each operand to 
occupy two registers, the normal and an "extended" register marked with a an "x"
postfix.

The register that an operand occupies is copied to its register entry during
allocation. The result register, which can also be one to two registers, is 
assigned to be the output register from the operation to be carried out.

The "final" register is the register that actually carries the result back to
its parent operator in the intermediate tree. In most cases, it is the same as
the result register. However, if there are difficulties allocating that register
in the "context" of the calling operator, the two registers can be different.
When the intermediate is run through the coding phase, register copy operations
are generated as needed to move the register from the result to the final (or
"transfer") register.

The temp registers are simply used to signal to the coding pass where to place
temp registers that are needed.

All of these registers can have the rgnull value, meaning that there is no 
register needed or allocated there.

It is also possible to have a special register value rgflg. This indicates that
the value lies not in a register, but in a flag. To determine which flag, you
must look at a separate flag value:

lflg      Contains the left operand flag value.

rflg      Contains the right operand flag value.

xflg      Contains the extra operand flag value.

x2flg     Contains the second extra operand flag value.

The flag values are only relivant if the assocated register has the rgflg value.
The reason that flags are not directly represented as registers comes from the
way we treat them. Flags are not considered individual values, but as a "state"
of the flags. For instance, less than or equal is commonly represented by the
carry and the zero flags both being set. This model assumes that only one 
operand can or will be carried in the flags, so they are mutually exclusive. In
addition, values are typically carried in flags for a short time. The flag
system is really a simple way of letting the operator signal the true state
of a boolean return value, and let the parent operator decide what to do with
the information.

The register for a given operand in the intermediate is usually copied from the
final or transfer register of the subordinate entry (in fact, there are 
occasionally places in the code where the final register of the operand is
used directly). However, there are cases where the operand register does not
exactly match its transfer register. If the operand needs to be expanded, or
changed from a single to a double register, then the operand register will
be a double register, whereas the transfer register won't. In any case, it is
bad form to examine the operand intermediate entry directly. Rather the self
contained information in the intermediate entry itself should be used.

The converse situation is also possible. If the transfer register is double,
but what is needed is only a single, the double will be allocated in the
calling intermediate, whether it can use it or not. All results must go 
somewhere, even if they are then ignored.

REGISTER TRACKING

Besides the entries used to track individual registers, each intermediate also
keeps sets of all registers. These are used to track which registers are in use
at any given time.

push      Gives the set of registers that need to be pushed and poped.

alc       Gives the registers allocated at this node.

The alc set is used to perform basic register allocation, and tells the 
allocator exactly which registers are in use at any particular node. The push
set has each register set if the register is to be saved during the operation.
For each register set in the push mask, the register is saved before the 
intermediate operator is coded, and restored after. The push/pop scheme is used
to resolve register overflow issues.

The use of the alc and push sets to control allocation must be understood in
of the tree structure:

              + (add) 
              | Alc:  eax, ebx, ecx
              | Push: eax
              +
(load) L-------------R (load)
Alc:  eax            Alc: ebx
Push:                Push

Each intermediate has its own register allocation. It must apportion the operand
registers and temp registers from its own set of free registers. If a specific
register is not available, it must be pushed to make it available. Each operator
"knows what it is doing", and creates an allocation, or arrangement, of 
registers that makes sense, and does not overlap. When the intermediate entry
starts allocation, it inherits a copy of the current allocation from its parent.
If it needs a register that is in use by the parent, then it will put it in the
push mask. This means that it is saved and restored to and from the parent, and
is then effectively out of the register allocation. However, the allocation
within the intermediate itself must be consistent. If a register is requested,
but already allocated in this same allocation, then it is a double allocation
and a fault.

REGISTER ALLOCATION

Register allocation occurs by traversing the entire intermediate tree for a
procedure or function, and filling out the register fields in each intermediate.

While doing that, a set of register management calls are made to perform the
register allocation.

The routine:

procedure regblk(ip: intptr; var tr: regset);

Takes a full block tree, allocates all of its registers, and leaves the 
registers in the register fields of each operator entry. It takes a set of 
registers, which on return will be the total set of registers that were used
during the routine. This information is used to determine if the registers 
should be saved when a routine is entered.

regblk tours the graph by recursively calling itself, and performs allocation
on each terminal operator entry. These are entries such as tistiint, that hold
expression trees to be processed. Each expression tree is processed by:

procedure regexp(rr, rrx: regt; ip: intptr; var tr: regset);

Which assigns registers for the tree. Regexp recursively calls itself to
process each leaf in the tree. regexp takes as a parameter the two registers
that the operator being processed needs. These can be rgnull if there is no
specific register requirement. regexp also takes the set of allocated registers.

Regexp can, in cases, specify a register even if the final result may or may not
use it. For example, the rrx parameter can contain a register even if we don't
know if the operand to be processed has an extended register. The appearance of
a register in either rr or rrx means that if the result exists, then it will be
placed in that register.

The important thing to understand about regexp is that if a rr or rrx register
is specified, then the result will allways be placed there. It is not a
preference, it is a demand.

To perform the actual register allocations, a few routines do the bulk of the
work:

procedure getreg(var r: regt; ip: intptr; var tr: regset);
procedure getregbs(var r: regt; ip: intptr; var tr: regset);
procedure plcreg(r: regt; ip: intptr; var tr: regset);
procedure prfreg(var r: regt; pr: regt; ip: intptr; var tr: regset);

Each of the allocation routines takes a reference to the total allocation.
This is just an 'or' of all the registers that were used, so that genblk can
determine which registers to protect for the caller of a routine.

Each of the routines will be discussed in turn.

getreg

Takes the intermediate tree entry to allocate a register for, along
with a reference to the total allocation. It will find either a completely
free register, or not finding that, it will flag one of the registers in the
push mask, then use that. The register allocated is returned in the given
register variable.

getregbs

Performs the same task, but only allocates registers from the set that
are byte or word storable, that is, eax, ebx, ecx, or edx. It will not allocate
esi and esi. This routine is required for operands that must be stored to byte
or word values. The register allocated is returned in the given register
variable.

plcreg

allocates a specific register, which is passed. If the register is not
free, it is pushed.

prfreg 

is halfway between getreg and plcreg. It takes a "preference" register,
but if the register is not free, it will allocate another one. The reason for
this routine is that some register combinations save code, but not enough to
justify an extra push/pop to do it. An example of this is "add eax,n". The
target eax has a special more compact code format, but there is also a general
purpose "add r,n" that takes any register. The register allocated is returned in
the given register variable.

PERFORMING ALLOCATION

The register allocation is as simple as possible for a tree. Given only the alc
and push sets, the allocator can control the allocated registers with overflow
capability. The way to think of the allocator is to think of of each 
intermediate node as a box:

+--------------+
|    addint    |
|              |
|    alc       |
|    push      |
+--------------+

When the intermediate allocation starts, the parent allocation is copied into
the box, and the push set is cleared. The intermediate has complete control of
all the registers. If it needs a register that the parent flagged in use, then
it only needs to flag that as pushed, then it has the register to itself. When
processing is finished, it registers a result register, and at the same time
that the parent context is restored by poping any registers, the result register
is placed into the final or transfer register. The parent treats the box as a
function that places the result in the register it wants, and does not distroy
any other register.

MIXING FIXED AND VARIABLE REGISTER ALLOCATIONS

There is a non-obvious methodology for allocating a series of mixed fixed 
register allocations, or allocations to specific registers, and variable 
allocations that can go to any register. If a variable allocation is done, say
with a regexp() call without preference, and it allocates a specific register,
then that register is specified as fixed, then a "register already in use" error
may result.

The obvious solution would seem to be to process all individual fixed 
allocations first, such as plcreg(), then other calculations. But fixing a 
register takes it out of service, and doing that at the start may not be wise if
it might then be needed for suboperator calculations. So we need to think
carefully about allocations.

regexp() can be used either as a variable or fixed register complex calculator.
By contrast, getreg, plcreg, prfreg and the like are non-complex. Since a 
complex calculation can use any number of registers at any level, we need to
place operands in the following order:

1. Complex allocations with fixed registers.

2. Simple fixed allocations.

3. Complex allocations with variable registers.

4. Simple variable allocations.

REGISTER CONTEXT

The register context system is really separate from the register allocation. The
intermediate operators that care about context use it, mainly the loads and 
stores. Other operators simply use it to clear context entries out when they
are distroyed, corresponding to changes made to the containing register.

The context system creates context entries when simple values are loaded, and
flags them usable when a store takes place. Simple values are values
corresponding to a variable.

Context entries are kept in table indexed by register, and each entry contains
a type and an age in steps. The "steps" are simply a number that is incremented
each time the context is modified, namly the entry and exit of a context entry.

The main context management routines are:

function fndcxt(t: typptr): regt;
procedure setcxt(r: regt; t: typptr);
procedure remcxt(r: regt);
procedure cpycxt(dr, sr: regt);
procedure cpycxtp(dr1, dr2, sr1, sr2: regt);
procedure mrgcxt(view rc: regcxt);
procedure clrcxt;
procedure rescxt(var rc: regcxt);
procedure matcxt(t: typptr);

fndcxt

This routine finds if a register has the given context by type. If found, it 
returns that, else it returns rgnull.

setcxt

This routine sets up a context entry for the indicated register. The context
entry gets the type indicated, and has its age reset.

remcxt

This routine removes the context from the indicated register.

cpycxt

Copies a context from one register to another. This is used to update after a
copy from one register to another.

cpycxtp

This is the same as cpycxt, except performs copy on a register pair.

mrgcxt

Merges a saved context with the current context. Used to establish the net
context after a concentration point for two code flows.

clrcxt

Clears out all current context.

rescxt

Clears a stored context.

matcxt

Matches a context by type, and if found, clears it. This routine is used to
remove a context after it is updated, say by storing to the underlying variable.

The context system is simple in operation. A load of a simple variable checks
for a previous matching context entry, and if found, that is used instead of 
going through the actual load. If not found, then the newly loaded value is 
placed into the context system.

Contexts are saved at distribution points, or points where the code takes a 
branch, such as an 'if'. At a concentration point, such as where an 'if' comes
back together, the contexts are merged by comparing each register context 
between the saved and current context, and clearing out any context that is
different between the two. This can be extended to any number of merging entries
by simply merging all of the flows one at a time. This is how the case statement
works.

The entire context must be cleared at certain times. For example, we clear 
context both before and after while and for loops, and before a repeat loop,
although further research may discover a way to mitigate this.

In addition, we clear context after each call of an external or even built in
routine because the variables in the context might have changed. This is an
unfortunate side effect, and further research can be done to find ways to
more intellegently determine if the cached registers are really affected. For
example, a call to a global routine is never going to change locals.

FURTHER ISSUES

REGISTER "DRIBBLING"

It is possible that the algoritim can generate multiple pushes and pops of the
same register. Since each intermediate is responsible for preserving the 
registers of its parent intermediate, if a register is in use in the parent,
more than one use of the same register in multiple child nodes will cause the
same register to be pushed and poped multiple times.

One way to deal with this is as follows. Instead of having one "push" mask on
each intermediate, there would be a "push" and "pop" mask, each of which would
signify a push or pop of the register. The current method of marking a register
as saved by marking just the push mask would be to mark both the push and pop
masks, which would do the same thing.

Then, a post register allocation pass is done that would tour each node and look
for multiple push and pop operations on a single node. It would simply count the
number of suboperands with push and pop operations. Then, all pushes and pops of
the same register except for the first push and the last pop can be removed.
This means that the only push and pop that counts is the first one needed to
preserve the register, and the last pop that occurs before the operation is
processed.

LONG DISTANCE CACHING

We can increase the range of the caching algoritim by recognizing that 
registered contents can be reused much later by caching over longer distances
than the current algorithim.

We establish a "long distance" cache. This is a separate cache that does not
track register contents, but is a list of "available content". It is kept by
type, just as current caching is done. The cache is flushed at any change of
flow point such as a jump or label, or if the registers ever fill. The dx
cache also keeps a pointer to the intermediate that loaded that content.

In addition, each intermediate gets two "copy" entries that show if a copy from
register to register needs to be performed after the load for that intermediate
is performed.

On a load, not only the short distance cache (the current cache) is matched for
content, but then the dx cache is also searched. If the short cache fails to 
find content, but the dx cache has it, then the indicated intermediate is marked
to show a copy to an availble register, then that register load is skipped.

The result is that old contents will be reused, with just the cost of a register
to register copy instruction.

ALGORITHIM STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES

Although some aspects of the algorithim can be complex to understand, the basic
notion is simple, that each node of the intermediate controls its own 
allocation, and thus is self determining.

The disadvantage is that each node cannot know that it is pushing and poping the
same parent register, so "dribbling" a parent value is possible. Another 
disadvantage is that little is done about bringing important values forward in
registers. A register content either survives or it does not, and whether it
does or not is happenstance, or even stacked against the algorithim, since it 
tends to reuse the same registers over and over again due to demand allocations.

One of the big advantages of the method is that it "packages" the registers to
be used in each intermediate, and theoretically intermediates are individual
processing units. In reality, this symmetry is frequently broken, and
intermediate operator processing routines have to reach down into subtrees,
which means the register pass must as well.