The strict implementation of overrange types uses the idea that such types can be coined at
any time from subrange constructions, like:

type cardinal = 0..4294967296;

The existence of an overrange type is indicated anytime the range lies outside of -maxint..maxint.
All overrange types are considered integers within the parser. Therefore, such overrange types
are carried as integer types and treated as integer types until they reach the encoder. Thus, in
theory, nothing else than special evaluation of such overranges are required to achieve them.

However, there is the issue of how to specify overrange types in a non-overrange parser. Also,
the type integer and the constant maxint give an abstract method of specifying numeric types
in Pascal. The "meaning" of integer is to give the numeric type that is most natural and
efficient for the processor at hand. This "natural word size" existed when Pascal was created,
and indeed was a hard limitation on the CDC 6000 computer of its origination. 
Processors have become more adept at various size of word manipulation, but there still 
exists the concept of preferred word size such that it is more efficient to promote smaller types 
to that size so that they can be handled in common registers.

Its to that end that the overrange types also extend the logical numeric typing system, to provide
a logical and abstract method of specifying numeric types. These types, and their limit constants
are:

cardinal
maxcard

Cardinal specifies an unsigned numeric of the same class as integer. It has the value:

type cardinal = 0..maxcard;

where maxcard >= maxint, that is, a cardinal is at least the unsigned portion of a standard
integer.

A cardinal represents an unsigned numeric that is the natural word size of the processor.
Thus, it is the unsigned equivalent of an integer. Typically, it will be processed with the same
efficiency as an integer, since virtually all modern processors have both signed and unsigned
modes.

linteger
maxlint

linteger is a long integer, and it has the value:

type linteger = -maxlint..maxlint;

where maxlint >= maxint, that is, a long integer is at least the size of a standard integer.

A long integer is most commonly implemented as a double precision integer. It will take
two registers and require more instructions to process than an integer, but is a reasonably
optimized operation. Most commonly, maxlint = maxint*maxint*2 or maxint*maxcard.

lcardinal
maxlcard

lcardinal is a long cardinal, and it has the value:

type lcardinal = 0..maxlcard;

where maxlcard is >= maxcard, that is, a long cardinal is at least the size of a standard
cardinal.

A long cardinal is most commonly implemented as a double precision cardinal. It will take
two registers and require more instructions to process than a cardinal, but is a reasonably
optimized operation. Most commonly, maxlcard = maxcard*maxcard.

The existence of logical numeric types makes the "bootstrapping" of overrange types in the
parser simple. When the parser starts the process, the types are a simple alias of integer.
The encoder then treats them as special types, and can generate a new parser that has
the extended type ability. Then, the parser itself is extended to cover the new 
range types.

All types, cardinal, long integer and long cardinal, are considered aliases of integer in
parsing. As said, overrange types are considered subranges of standard integer in
parsing, since any idea of their being out of range is a machine dependent concept.
When math is done in the parser, it is done via separated sign math with long cardinal
values, which means that any constant value of any type is manageable.

Each type, cardinal, long integer and long cardinal, is shipped via intermediate using
a special type constructor. But on reaching the encoder, these types are sematically
treated as being integers. They are treated differently in the backend, however.

The new cases for the backend divide into two separate methods, one for cardinals,
and another for long integers and long cardinals. When the backend sees a subrange,
it is effectively classified as a cardinal, long integer or long cardinal based 
on its values.

For cardinals, the minimum case, the net processing is to use unsigned operations
instead of signed. This is already done in many parts of the backend based on both
valid subranges of integer (0..maxint) and also on address math operations.

For long integers and long cardinals, this takes changes to both the register allocator
and to the final code generation. The register allocator must allocate two registers for
each operand, similar to the current allocation of fat or tagged pointers. As parameters,
double precision has the same rules as fat pointers, that is, limited to certain pairs of
registers. The final coder must also generate operations for double precision. Finally,
a double precision function result must be allowed for.

A final issue, which will be covered at some future time (since it does not cause 
problems until we implement multiple CPU support), is the treatment of constants
maxint, maxlint, maxcard and maxlcard. Presently, these are hard equates in the 
parser.
They need to be logical constants that are passed on into the intermediate. The encoder
should be responsible for determining what the meaning of the constants are.
