                             USERS MANUAL FOR CH2PH

OVERVIEW

ch2ph translates C header files into Pascal header files. It generates two 
products, the first being a translated .pas file, and the second being a
.asm file with macro calls suitable to describe the functions found in 
the header file, as well as the data structures and defines.

FUNCTION

The ch2ph program is executed as:

ch2ph file[.ext] [options]

The input file is:

file.h
file.ins

The extention of the C file is .h by default. The file .ins contains a
series of special translation instructions.

The output files are:

file.pas
file.asm

ch2ph translates ANSI C with only one extention, which is to allow
"//" to introduce a line comment (a very common extention in C compilers).
#defines, typedefs, structs and function declarations are translated
in the file. Data objects and functions are ignored, and do not appear
in the output. This means, for example, that the contents of function
bodies are completely skipped. However, ch2ph does evaluate these constructs
completely, and will produce an error for non-ANSI constructs in data
and function declarations. These generally should not appear in header
files, and might have to be removed if they are non-standard.

It is important to understand that ch2ph is not a complete compiler, and
cannot evaluate the sematics of the program. Further, there are constructs
in C that are not possible to map to Pascal, although these are rare.
If the input contains an untranslatable sequence, it is up to the
programmer to change the input source until it is acceptable for translation.
Again, with most common C programs this should not be a problem.

Also important with ch2ph, the output file may undergo minor or major changes
in appearance from the input file. It may be reordered. The comments are
allways stripped. It is not intended that the result file become the self
documenting replacement for the original file. More typically, the original
header and documents for it serve that purpose, with general rules for
the converted file, and specific exceptions.

TRANSLATION

In the default mode (no options), translation of the file is fairly
straightforward. The following simple type conversions apply:

char           -> c_lang_char   -> char
unsigned char  -> c_lang_uchar  -> 0..255
short          -> c_lang_short  -> -32768..32767
unsigned short -> c_lang_ushort -> 0..65535
int            -> c_lang_int    -> integer
unsigned int   -> c_lang_int    -> integer (IP Pascal has no unsigned integer type)
long           -> c_lang_int    -> integer
unsigned long  -> c_lang_int    -> integer
void           -> c_lang_void   -> integer

The types "c_lang_xx" are output at the start of the file, and serve as a general
anchor point for the types used from C. These type names also protect the original
definition of the types. For instance, "integer" can be redefined, but the type
used for C equivalences will not change.

All names created by ch2ph are prefixed by "c_lang_" which keeps them from
colliding with names from the original program, but obviously is not a %100
foolproof solution. Any header names that still collide must be fixed manually
in the source header.

Pointers in default mode are allways translated literally. For example:

char *s

Becomes

^char

Even if a string is actually meant. In C, there are two major ambiguities
in the use of pointers:

1. On passed parameters, a pointer could be meant as an array, or as
a pointed to item.

2. On passed parameters, a pointer could indicate a parameter passed by
reference and not value.

The default mode "solves" this ambiguity by allways translating to the
strict pointer definition. This produces compilable output, but is not
necessarily the correct interpretation.

In this version of ch2ph, there is no ability to handle the ANSI C extention
of value passed structures. These will cause an error in ch2ph.

POINTER BASE TYPE COINING

In C, any type can be specified for a pointer, at any time. In Pascal,
pointers can only be created for named types. As a result, ch2ph creates
coined type names for the base types, which are output before the pointer
declaration. The form of a coined pointer type is:

type c_lang_ptr_type_N = ...

Which "N" becomes the sequential number of the pointer type name in
the entire file.

PARAMETER TYPE NAME COINING

When declaring functions parameters, C allows a full general type
specification, whereas Pascal requires a type name. If a pointer type
construction or function parameter has a type and not just a type name,
it is coined to become a named type. ch2ph produces a type definition of the
form:

type c_lang_FUNC_param_type_N = ...

The added type definition will appear before the function that uses it.
"FUNC" becomes the function name, and "N" becomes either the name of the
parameter, or the parameter number if the parameter has no name.

FUNCTION RESULT NAME COINING

Like parameters, a function result must be coined if it is anything but
and elementary type. It becomes:

type c_lang_FUNC_result_type = ...

"FUNC" becomes the function name.

PARAMETER NAME COINING

C allows parameter names to be left off of function definitions (functions
without code bodies). Pascal does not. When these appear, the parameter
name is coined:

c_lang_param_N

Where "N" becomes the parameter number. In this case, the function name
need not appear because parameters are in local scope.

KEYWORD COINING

C and Pascal obviously differ in keyword usage. If a C name is determined
to be a keyword in Pascal, it is translated as:

c_lang_key

Such as

c_lang_type

UPPER CASE/LOWER CASE COINING

C discriminates between upper and lower case, but Pascal does not. If there
is no conflict between identifiers in the source after case considerations
are removed, no action is taken. However, if there is a duplication, then
the first occurance of a case sensitive identifier is "awarded" the caselss
identifier, and all other definitions are coined to the form:

c_lang_ident_N

The "N" becomes the number of the duplication, for example, "2" is the
second caseless id, "3" the third, etc. There is never a "1" version of
the ID, because that is left at the original name.

Because case name coining actually changes the name of an existing identifier,
the listing ch2ph produces of such coined names becomes important, and the
final user of the header system must refer to this list to come up with
the proper name to use.

UNION COINING

C's union construct maps into undiscriminated variant records in Pascal. 
However, Pascal requires a variant selector type, even if the tag does not
actually occupy a field in the final record. This is handled by creating
a tag type for the union which appears prior to the union definition. It
is of the form:

type c_lang_tag_N = 0..X-1;

"N" becomes the sequential number of the type in the source. "X" is the maximum
number of fields in the union.

STRUCTURE FILL COINING

In C, structure fields can be anonymous if their bit field is specified instead.
These fields are coined as:

c_lang_field_N

Where "N" is the sequence number of the field within that structure.

BITFIELD TYPING

In C, a structure field can be specified to fit in any bitfield, subject to the
rules of C (for example structure fields cannot be fielded). ch2ph further
restricts fieldable types such that only integer or integer devrived types can
be fielded. The result will be a subrange, bounded to zero, that indicates the
same number of bits as the type. For example:

struct a {

    int a: 8;
    
}

Will become

type a = record

   a: 0..255
   
end;

An error will be output if the base type cannot contain the resulting subrange.
Also note that this will not actually result in a field that occupies the
specified number of bits unless the proper packing option for records is turned
on.

DEFINITIONS

Definitions (produced with the "#define" command) can contain either constants
used in the program or macros designed to perform manipulations on the source.
Unfortunately, there is no perfect algorithim to determine how a macro will be
used. For example, the original programmer could well have used a macro such
as:

#define NUM A5

printf("NUM = %x\n", 0xNUM);

To hide the exact syntax of a numeric constant. However, such uses are
fortunately rare, and all that remains is to separate macros intended to be
constants from macros intended to manipulate source.

First, only the final defines are output. If an "#undef" command was used
to remove the macro by the end of the source, it will not be considered.

Second, only simple macros are translated. If a macro has parameters, it is
automatically disincluded.

Finally, each macro is evaluated as a constant expression (using the
ANSI C constant-expression grammar). If an error free result is obtained
(no syntax errors or other errors), then the constant value of the
integer or string is used, and translated to the result.

During the constant evaluation, all included macros are expanded, using all
of the macros present at the end of the complete file, without regard
for any changes during the processing of the heeader ("#undefs" for example).
This accurately emulates how the macro would be seen by the program that
included the header file.

One consequence of the evaluation is that the formula for the constant is lost.
Another is that all numeric constants are output as hex numbers regardless
of their appearance in the source.

VOIDS AND VOID POINTERS

Voids are converted to _c_lang_void, and a void pointer would be a pointer to that
type. Void is defined to be integer by a special definition at the top of
the output file, but allways builds on the _c_lang_void name. The reason for this
is to make it clear what is a void pointer in the output file. Void types
are clearly outside of the scope of Pascal translation, and as such are
left to the instruction file to clean up.

ARRAYS

When arrays are declared by formal syntax:

int x[10]

They are translated:

x = array [0..10-1] of integer;

If an array is declared with no bounds, then it becomes a pointer:

int x[]

becomes

x = ^integer

CONST PARAMETERS

Parameters that are typed "const" will be typed "view" in the translated header.
This makes little practical difference, however, since it mainly dictates what
the rules are within functions and procedures, not how they are called.

TYPE COMPRESSION

Because Pascal has more strict type equivalence than C, a "compression" phase
is performed on the complete type database. This consists of merging duplicate
typing trees and pruning the resulting redunant type nodes. The names of types
are moved to the cooresponding types as well, which may result in several
type names indexing the same type (allowed in Pascal). The result is that for
any types which are equivalent will end up being the same type.

REPORTING OPTIONS

-ld or -listdefines

Prints a listing of all definitions that appear in the source. Definitions that
were removed with "#undef" do not appear. Each definition is output in the
form:

name instance value
   param param param....

The name is the name of the definition. The instance is the number of caseless
duplicates that have appeared before, and will be the number that appears
in a caseless coin. The value is the replacement string value.
On the next line, indented, each parameter declared in the macro appears.

-lc or -listcoin

Produces a listing of all coined identifiers that were used, and what the
original identifiers were.

TRANSLATION OPTIONS

Although the instruction file is what mainly drives the translation, there are
one or two options that dramatically improve the output and reduce the need
for translation instructions.

-pp or -pointerparameter

With this option, parameters that are declared of the form:

type *...

(where the "*" pointer declaration directly appears in the parameter definition)
are turned in two VAR or VIEW parameters (depending on their "const" status).
Only the first "*" in the definition is used. For example:

int **x

Becomes

var x: ^integer

(in this case, ^integer is invalid, and would be subject to parameter type
coining as described above).

This translation is applied AFTER char string coining, if enabled.

-sp or -stringpointer

In parameter types, turns any:

char *

Into

packed array of char

This rule works regardless of if the type appears directly in the parameter
definition or is a named type. Unlike pointer parameter conversion, it does
not work on more complex types, for example:

char **s

Will not be translated.

String conversion tends to convert simple string calls into their correct
form. The main problem with it is that any calls where the desired result
is really a single character pointer will be changed. This can be overridden
with instructions.

.ASM HEADER FILE

Besides the translated .pas header file, ch2ph also outputs an assembly language
file that gives instructions for how to translate Pascal calls into the C system
calls needed to interface to the operating system. This is done in a processor
neutral way, however, that relies on assembly language macros to perform the
convertion. The basic layout of the macro call is:

ptoc   result, param1, param2, ... paramN

Each parameter is a keyword that indicates two things:

1. Its presense indicates a parameter exists, and so the whole parameter count
is indicated.

2. Each keyword indicates what conversion, if any, is to be performed on the
parameter, either before the call, after the call, or both.

The result keyword tells what happens with any function result. If no function
result is present (a procedure) the code "null" is used.

PARAMETER CODES

The following parameter keywords exist, with their meanings:




