                             NOTES

1. Automatic cancel. When we establish a "buffer task" to handle the
front end of gralib, we can accept wm_quit messages, then set a timer,
for say, 1 second. Then if the program does not exit, it gets shut down.
This is warranted because it is defacto proof that the program is not
being responsive, and anyways it is a user ordered shutdown (vs a simple
watchdog).

2. Automatic hold. An ordinary program as wrapped that prints info and
exits will close the window before it is seen. We can refuse to exit
unless a valid quit has been executed, but this creates a situation where
a program that uses it's own exit method (exit yes/no ?) would be
prevented from exiting. A rationale goes like this: A program that does not
use the message driven exit is not "in the system" and so needs to be
stopped on its own behalf. There is no real way to determine that a program
has legitimately performed an exit.
Ideally, the exit places a "terminated" message in the title bar.
The behavior of such "inknowing" programs gets to be very similar to dos
emulated programs.

3. Should a program that gets halted by the readln quit rule get a terminated
window ? The "no" rationale is that the user has ordered a stop, and gets
it.

4. Instead of flagging an error when the user gives graphical commands to
an ordinary file, we could go ahead and write metagraphic commands to the
file. This allows the user to mix and match his own formats, and gives
a good model for creation of metafiles. It also solves the problem with
explaining metafile non-interactivity. Since only a single output file
is written, it is self explainitory that the file is only single sided.
We can also add some more elements to complete this:

- Sync statements. Would cause a hold for a given time. This can be relative
to the start of the play, or to the last time mark, etc.

- Stop statements. Would cause the play statement to exit. We could resume
play, or do anything else. This could also be a sync, since we could then
check sync. It could be a letout to perform paging (on a printer). Or other
uses.

- "metaport(file, on/off)" statement enables the creation of a portable
metafile. This is off by default. Normally, OS specific metas are written,
which makes them faster. The portable format creates a general purpose
play file. One problem with os specific files is inserting a "stop"
statement.

5. For animation, we need to split the "select" statement to display
and draw separate buffers. One way is to define "display(file, no)" and
"draw(file, no)" statements that do this separated work. Then select
just calls these at the same time (actually, "draw" followed by "display",
because otherwise the drawing might continue into the displayed surface).