                                UCS SUPPORT

OVERVIEW

IP Pascal will directly support UCS (Universal Character Set) in various forms.
UCS defines two formats, UCS-2 and UCS-4, which are 16 and 32 bit character
formats, of which UCS-2 is a parallel standard to Unicode.
IP Pascal uses the UCS-2 and UCS-4 formats internally, and supplements these
by two new formats, UCS-1 and UCS-2, which are simply obvious derviations of
the UCS format. These are translated on input and output to the format UTF-8.
UTF-8 allows all of UCS-1 through UCS-4 to be represented in a file, is
completely upward compatible with ASCII, and is widely supported.

NOTE: UCS-1 is our terminology for 8 bit ISO 8859-1. The ISO only defines
UCS-2, and UCS-4 as official terms. 

UCS-1

UCS-1 takes 8 bits per character, with a "set of char" occupying 32 bytes.
UCS-1 is completely compatible with ASCII both in memory and in text files.
The values in the ASCII range, 0-127, are left entirely alone by UCS-1.

The values 128-255 are Latin-1, as described by ISO 8859-1. The Latin-1
codeset describes some of the most used characters in addition to ASCII,
that allow European languages to be represented.

When UCS-1 is input from a "text" type file, it is translated from UTF-8.
ASCII codes in the 0-127 range are left as is, but all UCS formats are decoded
from the file. Then, codes with values > 255 are changed to the "no code"
character, which is an ASCII '.' (period). Codes in the range 128-255 are
passed though as UCS-1 codes.

When UCS-1 is output to a "text" type file, it is translated to UTF-8 without
loss. The ASCII codes in the 0-127 range are passed through as is, but Latin-1
characters in the range 128-255 are translated to their UTF-8 equivalents.

If it is needed to output files that can be read with both UTF-8 and ASCII
only programs, then only ASCII values should be output. Specifically, this
means that direct encoding to Latin-1 characters without UTF-8 formatting
is not possible.

When UCS-1 is received from the operating system, and it can be determined
that the character received is not in the UCS-1 character set (which could
occur for several reasons), it is replaced with the "no code" character ('.').

WHen UCS-1 is sent to the operating system, and the character to be sent is
invalid for that operating system, then it is replaced with the "no code"
character ('.').

UCS-2

UCS-2 features 16 bit characters, with "set of char" occupying 8192 bytes.
The endian mode of characters is the same as the host machine.

Any program that uses UCS-1 can be recompiled at any time to 16 bit character
mode. There are no special types, functions or other support needed to utilize
16 bit characters. In particular, this means that (unlike other languages),
there is no support for mixing 8 and 16 bit character sets in the same program.

UCS-3 AND UCS-4

UCS serves as a "clearing house" of characters used from around the world,
and it is known that UCS-2 will be exceeded before all the worlds languages
are adequately represented. UCS-3 and UCS-4 modes exist in IP Pascal, but
are not commonly supported at present in operating systems.

UCS-3 makes data of type char occupy 3 bytes and "set of char" occupies
2,097,152 bytes.

UCS-4 makes data of type char occupy 4 bytes and "set of char" occupies
536,870,912 bytes.

Because sets of UCS-3 and UCS-4 are clearly impractical, it is important to only
use sets of interesting subranges of these character sets.

As for the case when UCS-2 is not supported by the operating system, characters
received from the OS are zero extended to become UCS-3 or UCS-4 characters
on receipt, and characters greater than 65536 are translated to the "no code"
character before sending to the OS.

USE WITHIN PROGRAM

A 16 bit character program uses 16 bit representations for all characters
internally. If the native operating system supports UCS-2, then all calls
are made using UCS-2 characters in the endian mode of the host. If the
operating system does not support UCS-2, characters received by IP Pascal
are zero extended on receipt from the OS. Before sending to the OS, characters
in the range 128-65535 are replaced with a operating system defined "no code"
character, which indicates lack of local code display for that character.
In ASCII, this is the '.' (period) character, but where possible, a special
character may be used, commonly a small, outlined box.

IP Pascal assumes Normalization Form C or NFC representations. This means
that the use of combining sequence characters is not supported, and the
rule exists that each 16 bit character code has a corresponding character
cell. This greatly simplifies internal processing of UCS-2.

IP Pascal does not at this time support character code pathing, that is,
characters that appear right to left, or up and down, etc. This means that
the program is responsible for correctly pathing and formatting such
characters.

Escapes to 16 bit characters work exactly as in 8 bit mode. Ie., \6025
is a valid UCS-2 character.

Because UCS-2 uses much more space to store "set of char", applications
that don't arbitrarily use the entire character set will be rewarded with
less space used. Sets that work with ASCII relations (like '0'..'9' or
'a'..'z' will not be any larger than their 8 bit character set equivalences.

I/O TO AND FROM TEXT FILES

UCS-2 is represented within a text file in the UTF-8 format. UTF-8 is completely
upward compatible with ASCII in the 0-127 value range. UTF-8 is the input
and output format for all IP Pascal application packages, including the
compiler (which is why 128-255 character representations cannot appear
directly in string constants, but must be escaped).

In 16 bit character mode, the libraries automatically both decode and encode
from and to UTF-8 to the internal 16 bit character representation (this is
called "hard convertion"). This occurs whenever characters are input and output
to text files. This only occurs on "text" files. "file of char" becomes a
literal series of 16 bit UCS-2 values, whose endian mode is that of the host,
with no line end or other special processing.

No BOM (Byte Order Marker) is allowed in a UTF-8 file, and the values in
the BOM are invalid. In addition, it is possible to have invalid codes in
in the UTF-8 format. These codes are converted on input to the "no code"
character, which is the outline box character in UCS-2.

Although UTF-8 supports encoding of the formats UCS-2, UCS-3, and UCS-4,
any characters in the range 65536-4294967296 are considered invalid, and
are converted on input to the "no code" character.

UTF-8 is further complicated by the line ending format. As in 8 bit mode,
IP Pascal will accept any of the four line ending formats (cr, lf, cr/lf,
lf/cr), but generate only the native format for the host machine (lf on Unix
machines, cr/lf on all others).


IP PASCAL TOOLSET AND UTF-8

The standard compiled form for IP PASCAL and assocated tools is UCS-2, with
any line ending mode. Source language files must be in ASCII, but > 127
valued characters can appear in string constants, character constants and
comments. As usual with ASCII encoding, all characters at or below value 32
(space) have interpretation only as separators.

Graphical editors in IP Pascal, and gralib implementations, are capable
of reproducing UCS-2 characters, but may not have the font capabilities to
to so. If a character does not have a corresponding character in an existing
font, it is printed in the "no code" character (small outlined box).

Terminal mode editors and the trmlib implementation are ASCII only, and
allways show characters > 127 in the "no code" character.
	   
LIBRARIES

To encode for UCS modes efficiently, each support module must be compiled
separately with the option set for that UCS mode. This leads to four sets
of libraries for each of the UCS-1, UCS-2, UCS3 and UCS-4 modes. Modules
that have been compiled for a particular UCS mode MUST be linked to other
modules compiled for that same mode.