Notes for gralib on Windows NT/Windows XP.

Gralib is implemented directly in GDI32 and allows access
to those features. The default fonts for gralib logical fonts
are:

Logical font      Actual font
================================
terminal          System fixed
sign              Microsoft Sans Serif
book              Times New Roman

Note that these defaults can be changed by command line option.

The technical font is an internally generated vector font. On
Windows, this is done with circular vectors and the result is
quite good.

TERMINAL MODE

The terminal font is the Microsoft System Fixed font, and terminal
fonts cannot be sized, nor are any modes available, including bold,
italic, etc. The Sytem fixed font is sized by the system appearance
settings, which are global for all windows.

The system fixed type is a bitmapped font created specially for
windows, and has the best appearance for small fixed fonts. Although
the font "Tahoma" is the same style font in TrueType, that font
just does not have the same appearance in the pixel resolutions used
at this writing.

TrueType fixed (or "monospace") fonts are usable in higher resolutions,
and as they become the norm the terminal default may be rethought.

In the meantime, you can use any font as a terminal font just by
selecting it.

TRUE TYPE/OPEN TYPE FONTS

Open fonts are a superset of true type fonts, they are
essentially true type fonts with Adobe Type Manager fonts
added in.

With the exception of the terminal font, Gralib only uses and selects
True Type and Open fonts, and these are all that appear in the fonts
list. The reason for this is that they scale to any size, and typically
have all modes available.

The "sign" logical font is designed to be as close as possible to
the Windows "system" (proportional) font, which is styled like Tohoma
or Microsoft Sans Serif. The default size for TrueType fonts is set
to also match the system font.

TYPE MODES

In windows, virtually all modes are usable including bold, italic,
underline, strikeout, subscript and superscript. Blink is, of
course, excluded.

Although Windows can synthiese underline and strikeout modes,
it does not synthesise italic and bold modes on most fonts,
Microsoft documentation to the contrary. Also, most fonts don't
have the full list of extra bold, condensed, narrow and similar
types. The best way to get increased type and mode choices from
Windows is to install large numbers of fonts with extensive
moding.

Gralib synthesizes superscript and subscript by selecting a
font size that is 1/2 the normal size and moving it up or down
in the character cell. If you want full size super/subscripts,
use normal mode type and reposition it.

ANTIALIASING

Gralib turns on antialiasing for fonts by default. Other possible
settings are off, and ClearType. ClearType tends to produce "thin"
looking fonts on standard terminals, but is said to enhance the
appearance of LCD screens. Some users may like the clean look
of fonts without antialiasing.

INCLUSION MODE

Gralib uses "inclusion mode" for lines and figures, meaning that
if you specify a line from (1,1) to (10,10) you get a line
including the ends (1,1) and (10,10). Windows uses an excluded
mode that does not draw the last point. This is fully compensated
by gralib,  but the algoritim in use produces slight errors in
non-orthogonal lines of greater than one pixel in width. These
lines are approximations anyways, and this effect is not noticable.
Gralib will get improved handling of these cases at a later time.

FRAME TIMING

Windows does not allow access to frame timing in GDI32 mode. The
frame timer is set for the default of 60fps. Other modes such as
directX will allow this.

STARTUP MODES AND DEBUGGING

The normal use of gralib is with the genpe flag /wg (Windows
Graphical) which flags special handling for the program However,
on Windows NT and XP, the program will run without the flag. With
/wg, the program will start as a separate process, but without it,
and if the program is executed from a command line, then the
shell will await the completion of it. This mode is similar to
Unix/Xwindows, and can be usefull, especially if you use an advanced
shell that can select background processing for such a program,
either by flagging the command as background on the command line,
or with a "place in background" control key.

In this "non-graphical" mode, it is also possible to output and
input serially to the command window. This either appears in the
command window where originally executed, or in a special command
window if the program is executed directly from another grapical
program. This makes it possbile to send normal writeln statements
to the Window for debugging.

Normally, gralib reassigns the input ("_input") and output ("_output")
files to the main window. However, you may specify the following
files under gralib:

_debug_in   - Receives input from the command window.
_debug_out  - Sends output to the command window.

These are "bypass" files, and gralib actually reassigns these files
to "_input" and "_output" and sends them down to the next I/O layer.

CONTROL CHARACTERS

All control characters, which are defined as any character with a value
less than space (32 or $20 hex) are suppressed. The control characters
that do not have a direct function are no-ops, and neither print nor
move the cursor to the right. Note that on virtually all fonts under
windows, the control character locations do not contain printing
characters, but instead contain a "box" character to indicate a
non-printing character.


