              THE CLIMB TO PARADIGM: GRALIB AND THE NESTED WINDOWING SYSTEM

Trmlib and gralib provide a nested system of standards for access to onscreen
display for a program. The idea is that the historical progression of line,
character, graphical and then windowed interfaces follow in a natural
progression of nested paradigms. This is done using only a single mode change,
where "mode" is defined as a behavior change of the interface that is 
implemented by a state bit in the interface. This mode change, "automatic
wrap/scroll" mode was required to join the traditional need to keep the cursor
on the screen to the modern "virtual" screen mode, where the screen is 
considered to be a window on a virtual 2d plane.

The original line oriented paradigm was that a series of characters could be
output up to the limit on a single line, then a special sequence executed to
register that line and start a new one. In Pascal, each line is automatically
set active by the opening of a file, or the completion of the last line. A
line is completed by an eoln.

This simple paradigm fit well the existing input and output devices of the
1940's and 1950's, punch cards, magnetic tape, and printers. Although usually
thought of as a teletype standard, line orientation was mostly implemented
by punch card input, and line printer output, which meant that lines were
handled as units.

Even though the paradigm was simple, it already had ambiguities in it's
implementation. What occurred when there were more characters on a line than
the output device could handle was the major issue. Several common
alternatives were:

1. Indicate an overflow on the line, by special character or collumn mark,
and trucate the overflow.

2. Refuse to move past the last character on the line, usually resulting in
overprinting that character.

3. Finish the current line and start another.

Others are possible and were used.

Option (2) might seem to be an irrational response to the problem, but many
systems, including mechanical typewriters, did this by default.

The "winning" paradigm appeared to be (3), because it conserves printing
in the case of overflow. However, this causes issues of it's own, as we will
see later in this paper.



